# Visualization and Counting of Damage-spots in Lymphocyte Nuclei from Fluorescence-Microscope-Images
Assessment of DNA damage caused by radiation and/or chemotherapy to normal as well as cancerous cells is of immense importance in several situations in health sciences such as those involving understanding cancer and its treatment. Of the different types of DNA damages, double stand breaks (DSB) is important, as it happens to be the most lethal. 

A standard method of assessing DSBs involves immunocytochemical assay based on fluorescence microscopy using molecular markers such as   -H2AX. In this method, the antibody specific to phosphorylated H2AX produces fluorescing spots in the region of each DSB. Since each spot corresponds precisely to one DSB, this method has been acknowledged to be the gold standard for DSB detection. Thus, by counting the number of fluorescing “spots” (FS) or “foci” in stained microscopic images of the nucleus, one can estimate the DNA DSB damage in any tissue at the cell-level. 

Manual counting of the FS from microscopic images, however, is tedious, subjective and also inaccurate, for various reasons including the 3-dimensional nature of the cell-nucleus. While researchers have proposed image processing techniques to deal with the problem, most of the work reported so far involves collapsing the 3D information onto a 2D plane, followed by counting. Such methods, however, cannot be accurate, as 3D information is lost due to the overlap. Thus, there is a necessity to count the spots in 3D. To enable counting, it would be useful to understand the nature (3D structure) of nucleus including the breaks, by visualizing the 3D volume over several orientations. 

This project aims at developing algorithms for counting the FS associated with the DSBs in microscopic images of the nuclei. Towards such an aim, a couple of visualization algorithms have been implemented. Based on the results of visualization, an algorithm for counting the foci, involving enhancement, segmentation and counting via connected component labeling, has been developed. Movies based on the voxel-driven projections over different orientation have been found to be interesting and effective in revealing the 3D structure of the DNA DSBs. The results of enhancement followed by the counting-algorithm, applied on several sets of real microscopic data, are encouraging i.e., comparable with the manually estimated foci-count.
